# Snowflake Sequences for PostgreSQL

Snowflake is a PostgreSQL extension that provides an `int8` and `sequence` based unique ID solution to optionally replace the PostgreSQL built-in `bigserial` data type.

Internally, `snowflakes` are 64 bit integers represented externally as `bigint` values. The 64 bits are divided into bit fields:

```
bit  63    - unused (sign of int8)
bits 22-62 - timestamp with millisecond precision
bits 10-21 - counter within one millisecond
bits 0-9   - unique PostgreSQL node number set in postgresql.conf
```

* The timestamp is a 41-bit unsigned value representing millisecond
  precision and an epoch of 2023-01-01.

* The counter is a 12-bit unsigned value that increments per ID allocation.
  This provides for 4096 unique IDs per millisecond, or 4 million IDs per
  second.

* The `node number` is a 10-bit unique identifier of the PostgreSQL
  instance inside a global cluster. This value is set with the
  GUC `snowflake.node` in the `postgresql.conf` file.

With this design each Snowflake ID is unique within one `sequence`
across multiple PostgreSQL instances in a distributed cluster.

## Installation

**Installing Snowflake with pgEdge binaries**

To use pgEdge binaries to install Snowflake, go to [pgeEdge Github](https://github.com/pgEdge/pgedge) and install the pgEdge CLI; then use the CLI to create a PostgreSQL node with the Snowflake extension installed:

`./pgedge install pg16 --start : install snowflake`

**Installing Snowflake from source code**

If you're installing Snowflake from source code, we assume that you're familiar with how to build standard PostgreSQL extensions from source:

```
cd contrib
git clone https://github.com/pgEdge/snowflake-sequences.git
cd snowflake-sequences
USE_PGXS=1 make
USE_PGXS=1 make install
```

After installing the Snowflake extension with the pgEdge binary or from source code, connect to your Postgres database and create the extension with the command:

```
CREATE EXTENSION snowflake;
```

## Configuring Snowflake

The Snowflake extension uses a custom GUC named `snowflake.node` that determines the `node` part of each Snowflake generated by the PostgreSQL instance. The permitted values are 1 thru 1023.

This GUC has an invalid default value (on purpose); if not set, the Snowflake extension will throw an exception on a call to `snowflake.nextval()`.  This is intended to prevent you from accidentally missing this GUC in your `postgresql.conf` file.

If you intend to use Snowflake in a multi-node, distributed, or replicated setup, it is important to set the GUC to a unique value for each PostgreSQL instance. There is no protection in place to prevent assigning multiple PostgreSQL instances in a multi-master cluster the same node number.


### Converting a PostgreSQL Sequence to a Snowflake Sequence with the Spock extension

If you are using the spock extension, you can use the `pgedge spock sequence-convert` command at the psql command line to convert your existing sequence definitions into Snowflake sequences. Note that this converts the sequence definition; existing values in a sequence column will not change. The command syntax is:

`pgedge spock.sequence_convert sequence_name`

**Where**

`sequence_name` is the name of a sequence; you can use wildcards when specifying the sequence name to convert sequences in more than one table. 

For example, the following command:

```sh
[pgedge]$ ./pgedge spock.sequence_convert my_sequence
```

Converts the sequences in tables that reside in the `public` schema of the `acctg` database to use Snowflake sequences. If you invoke the command on one node of a replicating cluster, the table definition updates are propagated to the other nodes in the cluster.  


### Snowflake Functions

You can query the following Snowflake functions at the psql command line to return useful information about tables that use Snowflake sequences.

**`snowflake.nextval([sequence regclass])`** 
Generates the next Snowflake in the specified sequence. If no sequence is specified, the internal, database-wide sequence `snowflake.id_seq` is used. For example, the following query returns the next number in the `orders_id_seq` sequence:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT * FROM snowflake.nextval('orders_id_seq'::regclass);
      nextval       
--------------------
 136169504773242881
(1 row)
```

**`snowflake.currval([sequence regclass])`** 
Returns the current value of the specified sequence. This value is undefined until the function `snowflake.nextval()` has been called for the sequence in the current session. For example, the following query returns the current value of the `orders_id_seq` sequence:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT * FROM snowflake.currval('orders_id_seq'::regclass);
      currval       
--------------------
 136169504773242881
(1 row)
```

**`snowflake.get_epoch(snowflake int8)`** Returns the timestamp part of a Snowflake as `EPOCH` (seconds since 2023-01-01) as a `NUMERIC` value with precision of three digits. For example, the timestamp of the following sequence value is `1704996539.845` seconds past Jan. 1, 2023:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT * FROM snowflake.get_epoch(136169504773242881);
   get_epoch    
----------------
 1704996539.845
(1 row)
```

You can use the `to_timestamp(snowflake.get_epoch(<value>))` function to convert the epoch into a timestamp.  For example:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT to_timestamp(snowflake.get_epoch(136169504773242881));
        to_timestamp        
----------------------------
 2024-01-11 13:08:59.845-05
(1 row)
```

**`snowflake.get_count(snowflake int8)`** Returns the count part of the given Snowflake as `int4` value; count resets to `0` for each new millisecond. For example:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT snowflake.get_count(136169504773242881);
 get_count 
-----------
         3
(1 row)
```

**`snowflake.get_node(snowflake int8)`** Returns the value of `snowflake.node` in `postgresql.conf` for the host of the specified Snowflake sequence. For example, the Snowflake sequence number `136169504773242881` resides on Node `1`:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT * FROM snowflake.get_node(136169504773242881);
 get_node 
----------
        1
(1 row)
```

**`snowflake.format(snowflake int8)`** Returns a `jsonb` object of the given Snowflake in the form: `{"node": 1, "ts": "2023-10-16 17:57:26.361+00", "count": 0}`.  For example:

```sql
acctg=# SELECT * FROM snowflake.format(136169504773242881);
                          format                           
-----------------------------------------------------------
 {"id": 1, "ts": "2024-01-11 13:08:59.845-05", "count": 0}
(1 row)
```


#### Reviewing Sequence Definitions in your Table Meta-data

If you query the table meta-data before performing a sequence conversion with the `\d+ orders` command, the PostgreSQL sequence is defined in the `Default` column:

```sh
acctg=# \d+ orders;
                                                             Table "public.orders"
  Column  |       Type        | Collation | Nullable |              Default               | Storage  | Compression | Stats target | Description 
----------+-------------------+-----------+----------+------------------------------------+----------+-------------+--------------+-------------
 customer | character varying |           |          |                                    | extended |             |              | 
 invoice  | character varying |           |          |                                    | extended |             |              | 
 id       | bigint            |           | not null | nextval('orders_id_seq'::regclass) | plain    |             |              | 
Indexes:
    "orders_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, btree (id)
Access method: heap
```

After performing a conversion, the `\d+ table_name` command shows a `Default` value of `snowflake.nextval('orders_id_seq'::regclass)`:

``` sh
acctg=# \d+ orders
                                                                  Table "public.orders"
  Column  |       Type        | Collation | Nullable |                   Default                    | Storage  | Compression | Stats target | Descripti
on 
----------+-------------------+-----------+----------+----------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+--------------+----------
---
 customer | character varying |           |          |                                              | extended |             |              | 
 invoice  | character varying |           |          |                                              | extended |             |              | 
 id       | bigint            |           | not null | snowflake.nextval('orders_id_seq'::regclass) | plain    |             |              | 
Indexes:
    "orders_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, btree (id)
Access method: heap
```


